---
layout: manual
title: Example Input File
permalink: /software/moltres/wiki/input_example/
---

The input file example used here is taken from
`moltres/tests/twod_axi_coupled/auto_diff_rho.i`. To run this input file from
the command line, run (substituting the path to the moltres root directory for
`$moltres_root`):

```bash
cd $moltres_root/tests/twod_axi_coupled
$moltres_root/moltres-opt -i auto_diff_rho.i
```

In serial, this job takes around 90 seconds on a 2.7 GHz machine. To run the job in
parallel, execute:

```bash
mpirun -np 2 $moltres_root/moltres-opt -i auto_diff_rho.i
```

where the number of processors can be changed from 2 to however many processes
you want to run. The parallel performance of the job depends on the number of
degrees of freedom in the problem and the preconditioner used. A general rule of
thumb for optimal scaling is not to go below 20k degrees of freedom per
processor, otherwise communication becomes a performance drag. Additionally many
preconditioners do not perform as well when spread over multiple processes as
they lose access to "new" information. (See
http://www.mcs.anl.gov/petsc/documentation/faq.html#slowerparallel for more
discussion of this). This particular input file (`auto_diff_rho.i`) only has
8,697 degrees of freedom so communication is a factor; however, the executioner
used is a direct solver which scales well. On the same 2.7 GHz machine, the
solution times for 1-4 processors are given below.

- Single processor solution time: 90 seconds
- Two processors: 50 seconds
- Three: 35 seconds
- Four: 30 seconds

Before delving into a description of the input file, we note that all the
parameter options for different input blocks can be seen by executing
`moltres-opt --dump`.

Example output corresponding to the input file under discussion can be found in
`$moltres_root/tests/twod_axi_coupled/gold/auto_diff_rho.e`. The most common
application for visualizing output files is
[ParaView](https://www.paraview.org/), although
[VisIt](https://wci.llnl.gov/simulation/computer-codes/visit/) or
[yt](http://yt-project.org/) may also be used.

Ok, running through the input file from the top:

```
flow_velocity=21.7 # cm/s. See MSRE-properties.ods
nt_scale=1e13
ini_temp=922
diri_temp=922
```

Variables defined at the top of an input file can be used throughout the
remainder of the file with
[GetPot](https://sourceforge.net/p/getpot/bugs/markdown_syntax) syntax. We will
show later in the input file an example of the GetPot syntax. `flow_velocity`
may be modified to affect our primary variables, temperature, neutron fluxes,
and precursor concentrations. Decreasing flow velocity will increase the
temperature increase through the reactor. Because of the negative feedback
cofficients of fuel and moderator for this reactor composition (modeled after
Oak Ridge's MSRE), the increase in average reactor temperature decreases the
total reactor power and consequently the neutron fluxes and precursor
concentrations. Similarly, increasing the inlet temperature, controlled through
`diri_temp`, decreases reactor power.

Following the GetPot variables definitions, we have the `GlobalParams` block:

```
[GlobalParams]
  num_groups = 2
  num_precursor_groups = 6
  use_exp_form = false
  group_fluxes = 'group1 group2'
  temperature = temp
  sss2_input = false
  pre_concs = 'pre1 pre2 pre3 pre4 pre5 pre6'
  account_delayed = true
[]
```

In `GlobalParams`, parameters like `num_groups` can be globally set to a
value. Consequently any class (e.g. the kernel class `GroupDiffusion`) that has
the parameter `num_groups` will read in a value of `2` unless it is overridden
locally in its input block. It should be noted that the `GlobalParams`
block and any other MOOSE input block can be placed anywhere in the input file;
at execution time each block will be read when appropriate. Parameters
description:

- `num_groups`: The number of energy groups for neutron diffusion
- `num_precursor_groups`: The number of delayed neutron precursor groups
- `use_exp_form`: Whether the actual neutron/precursor fluxes/concentrations
  should be represented by $$u$$ or $$e^u$$ where $$u$$ is the actual variable
  value
- `group_fluxes`: The names of the neutron group fluxes
- `temperature`: The name of the temperature variable
- `sss2_input`: True if the macroscopic group constants were generated by
  Serpent 2. False otherwise
- `pre_concs`: The names of the precursor concentration variables
- `account_delayed`: Whether to account for delayed neutron production. Modifies
  the neutron source term

Following
`GlobalParams` in our example, we have the `Mesh` block:

```
[Mesh]
  file = '2d_lattice_structured.msh'
  # file = '2d_lattice_structured_jac.msh'
[]
```

Before describing the `Mesh` block, we note that comments in the Moltres input
file can be introuduced with the `#` character. Any characters following the `#`
character will not be read by the MOOSE parser.

The two most commonly used `Mesh` types are `FileMesh` and `GeneratedMesh`. The
`Mesh` input block by default assumes type `FileMesh` and takes a parameter
argument `file = <mesh_file_name>`. Many MOOSE users generate their meshes using
Cubit/Trellis. For national lab employees this software is free; however,
academic or industry users must pay. Consequently, Moltres meshes to date have
been generated using the software [gmsh](http://gmsh.info/) which is free and
open source. Binaries for Windows, Mac, and Linux as well as source code can be
downloaded [here](http://gmsh.info/#Download). Ubuntu users may also install
`gmsh` using `sudo apt-get install gmsh`. We will not go into the details of
using `gmsh` but the interested user should peruse its
[documentation](http://gmsh.info/doc/texinfo/gmsh.html). There are many example
`gmsh` input files in the Moltres repository (denoted by the `.geo`
extension). To generate a mesh for use with Moltres, a typical bash command is
`gmsh -2 -o file_name.msh file_name.geo` where `2` should be replaced with the
dimension of the mesh, the argument following `-o` is the name of the output
`.msh` file, and the last argument is the input `.geo` file.

Gmsh or Cubit can be used for generation of highly complex mesh
structures. However, if the user just wishes to generate a simple mesh, he/she
may use MOOSE's built-in type `GeneratedMesh`. For using `GeneratedMesh` we
refer the reader [here](http://mooseframework.org/wiki/MooseSystems/Mesh/).

Next in our example input file, we have the `Problem` block:

```
[Problem]
  coord_type = RZ
[]
```

The `Problem` block may usually be omitted from the input file for a Cartesian
simulation. However, since this particular example is using 2D-axisymmetric
coordinates, we have to convey this information using `Problem`'s `coord_type`
parameter.

The `Variables` block introduces sub-blocks:

```
[Variables]
  [./group1]
    order = FIRST
    family = LAGRANGE
    initial_condition = 1
    scaling = 1e4
  [../]
  [./group2]
    order = FIRST
    family = LAGRANGE
    initial_condition = 1
    scaling = 1e4
  [../]
  [./temp]
    initial_condition = ${ini_temp}
    scaling = 1e-4
  [../]
[]
```

Sub-blocks are initialized with `[./<object_name>]` and closed with `[../]`. The
`group1` sub-block creates a `MooseVariable` object with the name `group1`. The
`family` parameter describes the shape function type used to form the
approximate finite element solution. The `order` parameter denotes the
polynomial order of the shape functions. `initial_condition` is an optional
parameter that can be used to set a spatially uniform initial value for the
variable. `scaling` is another optional parameter that can be used to scale the
residual of the corresponding variable; this is usually done when different
variables have residuals of different orders of magnitude.

```
[Precursors]
  [./pres]
    var_name_base = pre
    block = 'fuel'
    outlet_boundaries = 'fuel_tops'
    u_def = 0
    v_def = ${flow_velocity}
    w_def = 0
    nt_exp_form = false
    family = MONOMIAL
    order = CONSTANT
    # jac_test = true
  [../]
[]
```

Whereas all the other blocks that have been introduced are standard MOOSE
blocks, `Precursors` is a custom input file block unique to Moltres. The
`Precursors` action creates all the precursor variables, kernels, and
boundary conditions necessary for solving the precursor governing
equations. Parameter descriptions:

- `var_name_base`: The prefix for the precursor variable names. Name suffixes are
  numbers, e.g. `pre1, pre2, ...`
- `block`: This is a parameter ubiquitous to many MOOSE classes such as kernels
  and materials. By specifying a value for `block` the user is asking that in
  this case, precursors and their associated governing equations only be
  solved for in the `fuel` mesh subdomains
- `outlet_boundaries`: The mesh boundaries from which the precursors flow out
- `u_def, v_def, w_def`: The x, y, and z components of velocity, or in the case
  of an RZ simulation, `u_def` is the r velocity component, `v_def` is the
  z-component, and `w_def` has no meaning
- `nt_exp_form`: Whether the neutron group fluxes have their concentrations in
  an exponential form. If `use_exp_form` is false in the `GlobalParams` block,
  this should also be false
- `jac_test`: true if testing the application developer's jacobian against a
  jacobian formed through finite differencing of the residuals. Defaults to
  false.

```
[Kernels]
  # Neutronics
  [./time_group1]
    type = NtTimeDerivative
    variable = group1
    group_number = 1
  [../]
  [./diff_group1]
    type = GroupDiffusion
    variable = group1
    group_number = 1
  [../]
  [./sigma_r_group1]
    type = SigmaR
    variable = group1
    group_number = 1
  [../]
  [./fission_source_group1]
    type = CoupledFissionKernel
    variable = group1
    group_number = 1
    block = 'fuel'
  [../]
  [./delayed_group1]
    type = DelayedNeutronSource
    variable = group1
    block = 'fuel'
  [../]
  [./inscatter_group1]
    type = InScatter
    variable = group1
    group_number = 1
  [../]
  [./diff_group2]
    type = GroupDiffusion
    variable = group2
    group_number = 2
  [../]
  [./sigma_r_group2]
    type = SigmaR
    variable = group2
    group_number = 2
  [../]
  [./time_group2]
    type = NtTimeDerivative
    variable = group2
    group_number = 2
  [../]
  [./fission_source_group2]
    type = CoupledFissionKernel
    variable = group2
    group_number = 2
    block = 'fuel'
  [../]
  [./inscatter_group2]
    type = InScatter
    variable = group2
    group_number = 2
  [../]

  # Temperature
  [./temp_time_derivative]
    type = MatINSTemperatureTimeDerivative
    variable = temp
  [../]
  [./temp_source_fuel]
    type = TransientFissionHeatSource
    variable = temp
    nt_scale=${nt_scale}
    block = 'fuel'
  [../]
  # [./temp_source_mod]
  #   type = GammaHeatSource
  #   variable = temp
  #   gamma = .0144 # Cammi .0144
  #   block = 'moder'
  #   average_fission_heat = 'average_fission_heat'
  # [../]
  [./temp_diffusion]
    type = MatDiffusion
    D_name = 'k'
    variable = temp
  [../]
  [./temp_advection_fuel]
    type = ConservativeTemperatureAdvection
    velocity = '0 ${flow_velocity} 0'
    variable = temp
    block = 'fuel'
  [../]
[]
```

The `Kernels` block is pretty straightforward. The kernel type or class is
specified with `type = <kernel_type>`. The mathematical representation of each
Moltres kernel type can be found on the
[kernel wiki page](/software/moltres/wiki/kernels). Each kernel contributes to
the residual of the variable specified by `variable = <variable_name>`. Kernels
can be optionally block restricted by setting `block = <subdomain_names>`.

```
[BCs]
  [./vacuum_group1]
    type = VacuumConcBC
    boundary = 'fuel_bottoms fuel_tops moder_bottoms moder_tops outer_wall'
    variable = group1
  [../]
  [./vacuum_group2]
    type = VacuumConcBC
    boundary = 'fuel_bottoms fuel_tops moder_bottoms moder_tops outer_wall'
    variable = group2
  [../]
  [./temp_diri_cg]
    boundary = 'moder_bottoms fuel_bottoms outer_wall'
    type = FunctionDirichletBC
    function = 'temp_bc_func'
    variable = temp
  [../]
  [./temp_advection_outlet]
    boundary = 'fuel_tops'
    type = TemperatureOutflowBC
    variable = temp
    velocity = '0 ${flow_velocity} 0'
  [../]
[]
```

The `BCs` block is very similar to the `Kernels` block except the
`boundary = <boundary_names>` parameter must be specified to indicate where the boundary
conditions should be applied. The mathematical form of the BCs can be found on
the [BCs wiki page](/software/moltres/wiki/kernels).

```
[Functions]
  [./temp_bc_func]
    type = ParsedFunction
    value = '${ini_temp} - (${ini_temp} - ${diri_temp}) * tanh(t/1e-2)'
  [../]
[]
```

The `Functions` block is necessary when other MOOSE/Moltres objects specified in
the input file require functions. In this example we have a boundary condition
object `temp_diri_cg` of type `FunctionDirichletBC` that requires a function
object to specify the values of the variable `temp` along the reactor
boundaries. We name this function object `temp_bc_func` and specify it to be of
type `ParsedFunction` which is a function type that can be written in terms of
constants and the independent variables $$x, y, z$$ and $$t$$. Here we see the
use of GetPot syntax `${<variable_name>}$` to access the values of `ini_temp` and
`diri_temp` specified at the top of the input file.

```
[Materials]
  [./fuel]
    type = GenericMoltresMaterial
    property_tables_root = '../property_file_dir/newt_msre_fuel_'
    interp_type = 'spline'
    block = 'fuel'
    prop_names = 'k cp'
    prop_values = '.0553 1967' # Robertson MSRE technical report @ 922 K
  [../]
  [./rho_fuel]
    type = DerivativeParsedMaterial
    f_name = rho
    function = '2.146e-3 * exp(-1.8 * 1.18e-4 * (temp - 922))'
    args = 'temp'
    derivative_order = 1
    block = 'fuel'
  [../]
  [./moder]
    type = GenericMoltresMaterial
    property_tables_root = '../property_file_dir/newt_msre_mod_'
    interp_type = 'spline'
    prop_names = 'k cp'
    prop_values = '.312 1760' # Cammi 2011 at 908 K
    block = 'moder'
  [../]
  [./rho_moder]
    type = DerivativeParsedMaterial
    f_name = rho
    function = '1.86e-3 * exp(-1.8 * 1.0e-5 * (temp - 922))'
    args = 'temp'
    derivative_order = 1
    block = 'moder'
  [../]
[]
```

In the `Materials` block we specify materials that live on a mesh
subdomain. Any given subdomain can have as many materials as desired. An
important material in Moltres is `GenericMoltresMaterial`. Its parameters:

- `property_tables_root`: The path and prefix of the files that contain the
  macroscopic group constants that define neutron reaction rates. The suffix of
  these files identifies the property that each conveys. For example the file
  containing the fuel fission cross sections is in this example
  `newt_msre_fuel_FISSXS.txt`. Each of these files contains an interpolation
  table. The left column (column 1) is temperature. The remaining columns
  contain the macroscopic constants for different energy groups corresponding to
  the tabulated temperature, e.g. column 2 contains the constants for energy
  group 1, column 3 contains the constants for energy group 2, etc. The set of
  tables used in this example were generated with NEWT, part of the SCALE code
  system. Serpent, OpenMC, or any other macroscopic cross section generator may
  be used to create these simple input tables.
- `interp_type`: The type of fitting/interpolation to be carried out on the
  temperature grid. Options are:
    - `bicubic_spline`: Done when macroscopic constants are a function of the
      temperature of the local material as well as the average temperature of
      the other material
	- `spline`: Most common option used for monovariate interpolation between
      temperature knots
	- `least_squares`: Constructs a linear fit function of macroscopic constants
      as a function of temperature. Useful when group constant interpolation
      table is not monotonic
	- `none`: Only should be used when single values for constants are supplied
      at a single temperature
- `prop_names, prop_values`: name-value pairs used to define material property
  values from the input file. In this example, both the thermal conductivity
  $$k$$ and the specific heat capacity $$c_p$$ are defined from the input file
  for both fuel and moderator subdomains.

`DerivativeParsedMaterial` is a material inherited from the Phase Field module
of the MOOSE framework. Its useful for creating material properties that are
functions of solution variables and for coupling the dependency of the property
on the variable back into the Jacobian used for Newton-Raphson. A more in-depth
description of the material along with its relatives is given
[here](http://mooseframework.org/wiki/PhysicsModules/PhaseField/DevelopingModels/FunctionMaterials/).

Users can exert their greatest influence on the calculations through the
`Materials` block. Increasing values of `rho` or `cp` will increase materials
ability to store heat, enabling a greater reactor power. Because of application
of an insulating boundary condition at the outer reactor wall in this example,
modifying the thermal conductivity `k` has only a small impact on the
simulation. However, if the conductivity is lowered by several orders of
magnitude, the user will observe increases in radial gradients between the fuel
channels and graphite as well as a decrease in reactor power. Use of different
macroscopic group constant tables or direct modification of the current set
would also influence simulation results.

```
[Executioner]
  type = Transient
  end_time = 10000

  nl_rel_tol = 1e-6
  nl_abs_tol = 1e-6

  solve_type = 'NEWTON'
  petsc_options = '-snes_converged_reason -ksp_converged_reason -snes_linesearch_monitor'
  petsc_options_iname = '-pc_type -pc_factor_shift_type -pc_factor_shift_amount -ksp_type -snes_linesearch_minlambda'
  petsc_options_value = 'lu       NONZERO               1e-10                   preonly   1e-3'
  line_search = 'none'
   # petsc_options_iname = '-snes_type'
  # petsc_options_value = 'test'

  nl_max_its = 30
  l_max_its = 100

  dtmin = 1e-5
  # dtmax = 1
  # dt = 1e-3
  [./TimeStepper]
    type = IterationAdaptiveDT
    dt = 1e-3
    cutback_factor = 0.4
    growth_factor = 1.2
    optimal_iterations = 20
  [../]
[]

[Preconditioning]
  [./SMP]
    type = SMP
    full = true
	ksp_norm = none
  [../]
[]
```

The `Executioner` and `Preconditioning` blocks are essential to determining the
method used to solve the system of non-linear equations created by finite
element discretization of our molten salt reactor governing
equations. `Executioner` and `Preconditioning` documentation can be found
[here](http://mooseframework.org/wiki/MooseSystems/Executioners/) and
[here](http://mooseframework.org/wiki/MooseSystems/Preconditioners/)
respectively.

```
[Postprocessors]
  [./group1_current]
    type = IntegralNewVariablePostprocessor
    variable = group1
    outputs = 'console exodus'
  [../]
  [./group1_old]
    type = IntegralOldVariablePostprocessor
    variable = group1
    outputs = 'console exodus'
  [../]
  [./multiplication]
    type = DivisionPostprocessor
    value1 = group1_current
    value2 = group1_old
    outputs = 'console exodus'
  [../]
  [./temp_fuel]
    type = ElementAverageValue
    variable = temp
    block = 'fuel'
    outputs = 'exodus console'
  [../]
  [./temp_moder]
    type = ElementAverageValue
    variable = temp
    block = 'moder'
    outputs = 'exodus console'
  [../]
  # [./average_fission_heat]
  #   type = AverageFissionHeat
  #   nt_scale = ${nt_scale}
  #   execute_on = 'linear nonlinear'
  #   outputs = 'console'
  #   block = 'fuel'
  # [../]
[]
```

General postprocessor documentation can be found
[here](http://mooseframework.org/wiki/MooseSystems/Postprocessors/). In this
example, the first three postprocessors `group1_current, group1_old` and
`multiplication` are used to calculate the neutron multiplication between
current and old timesteps. The `IntegralNewVariablePostprocessor` integrates the
supplied variable's value over the entire domain at the current time step. The
`IntegralOldVariablePostprocessor` does the same thing but for the previous
time-step. The `DivisionPostprocessor` then divides `value1` by `value2`. The
`ElementAverageValue` postprocessor simply calculates the average value of a
variable over an optionally restricted domain. `AverageFissionHeat`, commented
out in this example, determines the average volumetric fission heating rate over
a domain. This has been used to implement gamma radiation heating in the
moderator as some fraction of the average fission heat produced in the fuel.

```
[Outputs]
  print_perf_log = true
  print_linear_residuals = true
  [./exodus]
    type = Exodus
    file_base = 'auto_diff_rho'
    execute_on = 'final'
  [../]
[]
```

`Outputs` documentation is
[here](http://mooseframework.org/wiki/MooseSystems/Outputs/).

```
[Debug]
  show_var_residual_norms = true
[]
```

This simply tells our executable to print the variable residual norms during the
non-linear solve.

```
# [ICs]
#   [./temp_ic]
#     type = RandomIC
#     variable = temp
#     min = 922
#     max = 1022
#   [../]
#   [./group1_ic]
#     type = RandomIC
#     variable = group1
#     min = .5
#     max = 1.5
#   [../]
#   [./group2_ic]
#     type = RandomIC
#     variable = group2
#     min = .5
#     max = 1.5
#   [../]
# []
```

The `ICs` block can be used to construct variable initial
conditions. Documentation is
[here](http://mooseframework.org/wiki/MooseSystems/ICs/). The commented out
`ICs` in this particular file are sometimes used to test the Jacobians of new
kernels and boundary conditions introduced into Moltres.
